Parametric model for the reconstruction and representation of hydrofoils and airfoils

K.V. Kostas, A. Amiralin, S. Sagimbayev, T. Massalov, Y. Kalel, C.G. Politis

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2020.107020
https://naval.hempnation.one/2025/02/16/parametric-model-for-the-reconstruction-and-representation-of-hydrofoils-and-airfoils/


Highlights
●Parametric model for generation of analysis-suitable airfoils & hydrofoils for use with isogeometric BEM solvers.
●Usage of the parametric model in efficient shape reconstruction from large points sets.
●Usage of the parametric model in shape optimization aiming at the enhancement of foil’s performance.
●Comparison of the parametric model with common airfoil parametrization methods used in pertinent literature.
Abstract
In this paper, we present a geometric parametric model that has been mainly designed to accommodate the need for an appropriate analysis model in the context of IsoGeometric Analysis (IGA) [1], but can be also employed as a universal tool for reconstructing and representing a wide range of different airfoils’ and/or hydrofoils’ families. This model is an extension of the parametric model employed in optimization of hydrofoils’ efficiency with the aid of an isogeometric boundary element method solver (IGA-BEM), presented in [2]. Apart from its apparent use in design evaluation and optimization, the parametric model can be further employed in a wider range of relevant applications. Specifically, in this work we begin by demonstrating its use, as an alternative approach, in efficiently reconstructing airfoil and hydrofoil shapes from large sets of points appearing, mainly, in the context of reverse engineering applications. This is further investigated and the parametric model’s performance in accurately representing existing airfoils is extensively benchmarked against results from pertinent methods and approaches followed in the aeronautics and aerospace research community. Finally, we demonstrate the use of the parametric model in a foil shape optimization problem. We conclude this work with a discussion on future enhancements and possible research directions.


Introduction
The performance of various marine structures depends on the hydrodynamic properties of appendages operating as lifting devices, as, e.g., keels, rudders, stabilizers, propellers, water turbines etc. As a general statement, the performance of these lifting devices is greatly affected by their shape and even small variations may have a significant impact. In this context, the development of optimization strategies coupled with efficient computational fluid dynamics solvers and appropriate parametric geometric modeling techniques, employed in the design optimization of lifting appendages and thrust generating devices, is highly desirable. A robust parametric geometric model plays a key role in the optimization process and many parametric models have been already developed in this context.

Parametric models commonly employed in isogeometric analysis applications use B-Splines or NURBS for the geometry representation and their control points (and weights) are typically considered the model’s parameters; see, e.g., (Nguyen et al., 2012; Nørtoft and Gravesen, 2013; Li and Qian, 2011; Lian et al., 2013). However, this approach is not very efficient and convenient from an engineering point of view since control point positions and weights have rarely any physical meaning. In this connection there have been works, e.g., Kostas et al. (2015, 2017) (Kostas et al., 2015, 2017) and Ginnis et al. (2013) (Ginnis et al., 2013), in which high-level parameters with a direct design & physical meaning have been introduced to relevant parametric models and employed for the generation of shape instances. Thus, the control points of the underlying geometric representation and the inherent complexity of free-form shapes are hidden from the user and are indirectly controlled by these high-level parameters. In general, parametric models comprise a list of exposed (external) and internal parameters, devised on the basis of the general shape that needs to be produced. Exposed parameters are accessible to the user of the parametric model and initiate the modeling process leading eventually to a corresponding shape instance. On the contrary, internal parameters are not accessible to the user and are kept for developer’s use, as means to internally control the shape construction process and retain the basic shape characteristics & constraints of the instantiated object. Furthermore, a domain of variation is assigned to each parameter assuring the modeling robustness while, at the same time, avoiding invalid geometrical models, as, e.g., self-intersections. In this context, parametric models favor the use of non-dimensional parameters, where possible, in order to avoid the interdependency between them. Exposed parameters are roughly categorized in two groups, global and local, according to whether their effect in shape design is of global nature (e.g., object’s main dimensions), or of local nature in the sense that they affect locally limited shape’s details. In this way, global variations induced by a small set of global parameters combined with local changes implied by local parameters, typically applied in hydrodynamic optimization processes, illustrate the applicability and powerfulness of the parametric design methodology.

The parametric model presented here was mainly built to accommodate the specific needs of design optimization with the aid of isogeometric analysis solvers. Hence, apart from the common requirements posed for generic airfoil/hydrofoil parametric models, some additional constraints were considered in its development. Specifically, we aimed at a model that satisfies the following set of criteria:The developed parametric model.

•uses a small number of parameters that limits the dimensions of the design space;
•possesses parameters with physical meaning (widths, angles, lengths etc.), which allow users to easily assign values to parameters;
•uses a small number of control points for representing the foil (this becomes even more significant when foils are used in the construction of higher level 3D entities such as blades or wings);
•provides an accurate geometrical representation (i.e., it can reconstruct existing airfoils with minimal deviation);
•uses basis functions in its spline representation, which are appropriate for the representation of physical quantities (velocities, pressures etc.) within the isogeometric analysis solvers developed in (Kostas et al., 2017) and (Chouliaras et al., 2017, 2019; Kaklis et al., 2018); both solvers employ a NURBS representation of the body geometry and hence this constitutes an additional constraint for the development of the model;
•generates shapes that do not exhibit undesirable oscillations, self-intersections, superfluous inflections points or any other type of shape anomaly that would hinder its use with an isogeometric solver.
Although the development of the presented model was performed under this special set of constraints, we consider that it has reached a level of maturity that allows it to be also employed for reconstructing and representing, accurately and robustly, a wide range of airfoils and hydrofoils families while producing comparable results to the more general methods for airfols/hydrofoils parametrization, such as the ones examined in the comprehensive reviews by Masters et al., 2016, 2017.

The construction process for our parametric model is presented and discussed in section 2. The model is materialized both within Rhinoceros programming environment (Robert McNeel & Associates and Rhino 5 for windows, 2018) and matlab (The MathWorks Inc. and Matla, 2016a), and constitutes an extension of the parametric model developed in (Kostas et al., 2017), which generated hydrofoils as closed cubic B-spline curves via a set of eight parameters. In this work, we have increased the number of external parameters to eleven, and later fifteen, non-dimensional ratios aiming at an increase of the model’s approximation power and coverage of the foil design space. Note that the number of employed parameters can be reduced to just five, or seven for the latter case, when dealing with symmetric foils, as we will discuss in §2. This set of parameters is employed in the generation of the two foil sides, via four simple cubic Bézier curves, which are then merged in the construction of the final cubic B-Spline curve representing the complete foil shape.

In this work, we initially demonstrate the parametric model’s performance in shape reconstruction from large foil point sets, followed by a more extensive investigation of its capabilities in efficiently representing existing families of airfoils and hydrofoils. A foil-shape constrained optimization example is used afterward to demonstrate the model’s use in an optimization framework and its capacity to efficiently explore the design space. Specifically, in section 3.1, the parametric model’s approximating capacity is demonstrated by reconstructing the shape of common foils from given, large and medium-sized, point sets. The approximation process can be accomplished through the solution of a minimization problem, which determines the parameter values for the corresponding parametric model instance. The performance of the parametric model is then compared with other general-purpose approaches, namely, two fitting algorithms of Rhino (Robert McNeel & Associates and Rhino 5 for windows, 2018), Rebuild and FitCrv, and a general point-set approximation method based on discrete curvature and knot insertion heuristics, proposed by Li et al. (2005) (Li et al., 2005). Our parametric model can achieve one order of magnitude better approximating accuracy, for the same number of control points, when compared with Rhino’s Rebuild command and Li et al. (2005) method. For the case of Rhino’s FitCrv command, our approximating accuracy is equivalent or slightly worse, but FitCrv requires a significantly larger number of control points. Rhino, among other more ship-industry-specific CAD packages, has been commonly used in naval architecture and marine engineering due to its flexible tools for generating free-form curves and surfaces, which justifies our selection as a benchmark tool in this context.
Section 3.2 presents a more thorough examination of our model’s representation capabilities and compare its performance against the more general airfoil-parametrization approaches employed in pertinent literature. Specifically, following the comprehensive reviews by Masters et al., 2016, 2017 we compare our model against 7 different airfoil-parametrization methods for 5 specific airfoils (RAE 2822, NACA 4412, ONERA M6, NLR 7301 and NACA 66 (3)418) investigated therein. Our comparisons conclude by examining the model’s capacity to represent an extended database of NACA-family airfoils, within an appropriate geometric tolerance, and how our results compare against the coverage achieved by the other methods for the same database. The parametrization methods examined in (Masters et al., 2016, 2017) are categorized as either constructive, when the airfoil shape is generated on the basis of the employed parameters, or deformative, when a reference airfoil shape is deformed to produce the sought-for shape. Constructive methods include: 1. B-Splines or NURBS fitting methods; see e.g., (Braibant and Fleury, 1984; Bisson and Nadarajah, 2015; Sherar et al., 2007), 2. Class/Shape function Transformations (CST) (Kulfan and Bussoletti, 2006; Kulfan, 2008), 3. Singular-Value Decomposition (SVD); see e.g., (Toal et al., 2010; Ghoman et al., 2012; Poole et al., 2015), and 4. Parametrized Sections (PARSEC) (Sobieczky et al., 1999). Deformative methods include: 1. Hicks-Henne Bump functions (Hicks and Henne, 1978), 2. Bézier Surface Free-Form Deformation (FFD) method (Sederberg and Parry, 1986) and 3. the Radial Basis Function Domain Element (RBF-DE) approach (Rendall and Allen, 1519; Morris et al., 1002). All of these methods are further described in §3.2 and (Masters et al., 2017).
Finally, in section 4, the robustness, design flexibility and design-space exploration capacity of the parametric model is demonstrated in a series of foil-shape optimization problems. In our examples, we aim in minimizing the ratio of drag over lift coefficients and constrain or minimize the deviation of foil’s area from a reference area. The lift and drag coefficients are calculated using the well-known XFOIL (Drela, 2018) computational package, while the optimization process is mainly driven by Genetic Algorithms. We conclude this work by briefly presenting some future model extension possibilities and potential applications in the area of forward and inverse design problems.


Section snippets
The airfoil/hydrofoil parametric model construction
The parametric model for a general hydrofoil and/or airfoil presented in this work is an extension of the parametric model developed in (Kostas et al., 2017) and employed in the shape optimization of hydrofoils with the aid of an IsoGeometric Analysis Boundary Element Method (IGA-BEM) solver. The model presented in (Kostas et al., 2017) generates a closed cubic B-Spline curve via a set of 8 parameters. The employed parameters were defined as appropriate non-dimensional ratios lying always in [


The approximation power of the parametric model
In this section we examine the approximation and representation capabilities of the developed parametric model. We begin our discussion by examining its applicability in a more general setting where points, commonly of large numbers, are supplied as a result of scanning, and/or other similar measuring processes, an existing body geometry and we are required to efficiently reconstruct the body geometry. These point sets are commonly polluted with noise and generally deviate from the idealized


Foil-shape optimization
In this section we present a shape optimization example that demonstrates the ability of the parametric model to efficiently and robustly cover a wide design space and its use in obtaining an optimized foil shape under specific geometric constraints. For this example we consider a 1-m long foil profile which operates at an angle of attack of 5o degrees in a flow regime with a Reynolds number equal to 106. Our goal is to maximize the foil’s lift coefficient (CL) and minimize the drag coefficient 


Model extensions and future work
This section is devoted to the discussion of some possible short-term enhancements to our parametric model along with some ideas regarding the use of our model in forward and inverse design frameworks.

Most of the parametrization approaches used in the comparison presented in §3.2 allow the employment of an increasing number of variables (design parameters) when requiring increased levels of representation accuracy. This feature has been partially implemented in our model by allowing the


Conclusions
An efficient and robust parametric model for the generation and representation of airfoil/hydrofoil shapes has been presented in this work. Its capacity in accurately approximating foil profiles with a low number of control points has been demonstrated for a number of considerably different shapes and a general approach for the determination of the parameter values has been proposed. Equation (12), which is used in their determination, describes a non-linear minimization problem in R11, or R15

Authors contribution
K.V. Kostas: Mathematical modelling, references, manuscript preparation & revisions, implementation of the parametric model along with its variants and modifications.

A. Amiralin: ANN modelling and benchmark examples for NACA database & NREL databases.

S. Sagimbayev: Implementation of Li et. al. method and relevant benchmark examples.

T. Massalov: collection of data and preparation of point files.
